[Music]
okay so let's talk a little bit about
some other non-ideal effects in a pn uh
junction
so we'll start out with a junction
recombination
and start deriving some expressions that
hopefully make sense to you
so here we are let's take a
p-n junction under bias as
sketched here and we write down again
the
mass action in non-equilibrium
we had written this down before this is
just a reminder that means
the product of n and p in this
non-equilibrium condition
is no longer just ni squared but it's
proportional to the exponent
of the applied voltage
which translates into the difference
between two quasi-fermi
levels for an electron quasi thermal
level and the
whole quasi-fermi level all right so
that being said we can use this
expression
for a little bit of work just as a
reminder what's the recombination
process
so you started with an electron and a
hole
and they recombine and destroy each
other
we've gone through that at quite some
detail and you remember this pretty
horrendous looking expression for the
shockley reed hall
equation that describes the
recombination via traps
and in order to get the trap current or
the recombination current
we integrate the total amount of decay
of these electrons
uh via the shockley read hall expression
and we integrate
the decay over the depletion region here
okay so let's make a couple of
assumptions to make our life easier
let's assume for simplicity's sake that
the
minority carrier lifetimes are identical
and that we deal with
traps that are at mid gap
or at the intrinsic level here that
means
that n on n1 p1 or ni
so that makes this expression we have up
here um
more palatable uh we basically plug in
n times p here and we find the ni
squared
and the exponential minus 1.
we are
setting the taus to be identical and
then we have a
the tau over here and an x plus p x
plus 2 ni all right so that's a
more palatable expression and
again what this indicates is that
there's a recombination
in the depletion region that is
significant
as you crank up a voltage
okay because you're creating a
significant charge
imbalance from the equilibrium values so
there shall be given that there are
traps and
a finite relaxation time
tau that brings in the traps there shall
be some sort of relaxation
now if the minority carrier lifetime
were
infinity tau towards infinity
right no relaxation that means this
relaxation term would be
zero so if we didn't have traps
then tau would be infinity then delta n
dt would be zero the recombination would
be zero
okay
all right now as before
you can write down the um
intrinsic energy level in the system
as part of the equilibrium on the left
and
add the apply an
applied electrostatic field
to it like this and you can then
plug this expression of ei
into the expression for n
over here and calculate an electron
density throughout the device
now in the majority carrier region
so in the end orb region n
is approximately nd right it's a doping
so it's flat
and as this distance here
between
the fermi level
and the intrinsic level sorry
you have a decaying exponentially
decaying number of electrons in the
system
so you end up with a curve like this
okay
same you can do also for holes
but now you express the holes as
n times p equals
ni squared e to the q va over
kt like this and
p is this whole thing
divided by n okay so we'll just carry
this expression
over here and you
then multiply through with the exponent
and you have an expression like this
you have a symmetric um x
expression you have constant
donors um holes
according to the acceptors on the p side
and you have an exponentially decaying
number of holes
throughout the rest of the device all
right
now let's see what we can do with this
for junction recombination
we want to evaluate this expression and
we want to make our life a little bit
easier introduce some
say helper coordinates where we
introduce a potential u that is now
normalized
by kt
and we'll do this for the applied
voltage as well
and we rewrite the expression for the
relaxation
rate here in terms of these u's okay
so nothing really fancy going on so far
but what i'll do is i'll pull out this
term
ua over 2 out of the exponent
on the top okay
and i see something up here that begins
to look
familiar if you're familiar with
additions and subtractions of complex
exponentials
complex exponentials would be sines and
cosines
decaying exponentials are hyperbolic
sines and hyperbolic cosines
so we can basically reformulate these
expressions
to in the form of hyperbolic sines and
cosines
all right and then ultimately we want to
expre integrate the expression for
delta n over the depletion region
here right good now
this we we only need to keep the terms
that are dependent on x
in the expression and that is our term u
here
so the hyperbolic cosine under the hood
stays in the integral
and we'll start trying to solve this
integral okay now
one approximation and again keep in mind
this comes from
sort of the 50s people not having
significant compute resources and they
try to get again analytical insight
one step you can do is you can just keep
the positive branch of this hyperbolic
cosine
okay so you approximate that with just
the positive branch and leave
delete the negative branch in the
hyperbolic cosine
then you can make an approximation
that you instead of having an electric
field that is really
spatially varying you can clip it to
some max value
and assume that it's constant inside so
if you do that
you can come up with an expression for
the
junction of recombination and forward
bias okay
and that's the expression
and notice the exponent of two
or one-half in this case this expression
here the component here
corresponds to a spatial effective
spatial width
and the excess carriers at mid junction
with a factor of 100 one half
indicates that you have um
due to traps and the traps are hidden
here in this towel okay so that's the
the lifetime the traps the properties of
the traps
so if you're pnn junction
behaves with this factor of one half
you know that down here in this region
you have
traps in your
in the depletion region and you need to
do some more about the quality
of your pn junction now
there's this dungeon design
considerations
um you know of the corner effect if you
studied electrostatics it's a typical
effect where you if you have a
two plate capacitors right you have
electric fields that
that run very parallel if you
have a point then
all your electric field lines are coming
to the point
and you have a strong electric field
coinciding
um on on on strong points or corners
the same is true when you have real pn
junctions that are
in planar design you might have designed
a junction
with this kind of design in mind where
you might have a linear
cut through in mind as we had sketched
in the beginning of these segments
but in three dimensions you really have
more complicated corners and you have a
corner effect
and you might have to do something to
get a better performance
in your recombination all right now
let's look at the
depletion
sorry in the reverse bias and let's look
at um
structure where we have now reverse bias
and a pretty large depletion width
we had to sketch that as you apply a
stronger bias you pull
apart the depletion regions even further
let's remind ourselves again of this
glorious shockley reed hall expression
that is pretty long and we'll do the
same approximation of what we just did
a minute or two ago we assume that the
taus are identical
traps are mid-gap and one and p1 are
then at mid-gap meaning an i
and we have an expression just like what
we just
had written down now
if i'm at a negative bias you can see
that
this term is negligibly small
okay and you end up
with it and you can neglect these ends
and you basically end up with
ni over two tau okay
so here we are we have a recombination
in the depletion region
which is something we had calculated
before
and we had calculated before if you have
a
depletion region like this and you have
a constant
recombination rate
you end up having
um an expression like this
where the current is now proportional
to your depletion region um
width okay
and we know that we had written down
that this width
here is proportional
to some vbi minus va
just like here okay so that now means
that
your current is dependent on
uh the depletion width and therefore
with the voltage and it goes as a square
root
okay so instead of having a flat
voltage independent reverse current
you have more current flowing that goes
with the square root of the voltage
so again this is another mechanism
to probe for traps in the junction
all right so we talked about junction
recombination
next step is we're going to talk about
tunneling
now here's a so-called isaki diode
isaki was the person that really
explained this well
and had some insight and what he did is
he
he not only sketched this into a
notebook
like nice did a couple of years before
him but he actually measured this
now this uh asaki
tunnel diode behavior behave only occurs
if you have a very heavily doped diode
so here's a diode sketch
in equilibrium that looks a little
different from what we had seen before
these are now degenerately dulled diodes
so the fermi level
is actually above the conduction band
edge and the fermi level for holes
is below the valence band edge
and notice that the built-in potential
now is actually larger than the gap
so early on we postulated maybe that's
that's the biggest uh
built-in potential you can come up with
but if you actually have very heavy
doping devices
you can build in a potential that is
larger than the gap
now if you compare this kind of behavior
to the traditional
iv of a perfect diffusion limited
pn junction that is a perfect
exponential
and you begin to apply a voltage
you find that there is some strange
behavior the current goes up
and it then goes down and then begins to
follow the normal
iv characteristics of the device so
where does this come from
um you can sketch it like this so you're
going in forward bias you're raising up
the quasi-fermi level for the electrons
and what you're finding is that on the p
side now you have empty states and
electrons will start to tunnel through
this device
and current grows more than it would
have grown
if the electrons were going over here as
diffusion
injected now if you increase the voltage
further eventually you hit a point where
this sea of electrons does not have
according
empty states available on the p
side so then there's no more injection
and then the device begins to just
behave like a normal diode where you
inject minority carriers on this side
okay so that's a so-called asakui diode
and leo isaki got
a nobel prize for that because
it really revealed that indeed a band
gap
exists and you can tunnel across a band
and this was a significant discovery in
the field of
semiconductor devices all right
so if you do this in reverse heavily
biased
device or actually any device
pn junction can do this under a strong
reverse bias what happens is you
uncover empty states here
and hold electrons can tunnel over
here this way and they have empty states
so you have
full bands here so the electrons are
occupying
states but they can tunnel over through
the barriers into empty states
now if you increase the bias further
you'll have more kernel
tunneling current as you expose more
states also
you narrow the tunneling barrier
and you can visualize it like this
effectively these electrons start to see
a triangular
tunneling barrier and you can calculate
that explicitly
and you might have read that in your
textbook or you might have done an
exercise
where you calculated that tunneling as
you increase
a higher bias this triangular barrier
becomes
narrower and therefore it increases the
tunneling
so this tunneling through a triangular
barrier you can carry through
there's an example in your textbook or
you can
calculate that as a homework exercise
all right so
uh we've made it through pretty much all
of the
various regions of the iv
characteristics
and let me begin to summarize that
these different slopes that we
identified
one half here one and two
and the square root behavior like this
are indications for the quality of your
device
how many traps do you have how high is
your doping
and it allows you to characterize your
device
so again when you run new measurements
on new devices people will ask you what
is
your ideality factor of your
iv characteristic and those would be
these exponents people refer to
now of course you can calculate all of
these things numerically now with
engines
that have these processes built in
but you still end up finding that these
exponentials really
are meaningful and they allow you to
get a full understanding of what is
going on in the device that a pure
numerical calculation would not reveal
so with that i thank you very much for
your attention
okay so we just talked about
tunneling let me talk about impact
ionization now
all right and that's really talking
about breakdown in the realistic
structure and avalanche breakdown
all right so if you have a junction in
reverse bias
you might have some electrons that are
still
around even in the reverse bias
configuration
and they might sort of trickle down and
interact with phonons and lose their
energy that way
okay so that would be a reverse biased
flow of
electrons now imagine that you have a
really high
bias applied to your device and somehow
you have this straight electron that is
up here
and let's say it has an energy that is
typically three half the band gap let's
assume that it actually travels
over here and gains a lot of kinetic
energy
so as it generates or gains a bunch of
kinetic energy
it can actually kick up
a an electron that sits down here kick
up and generate
another electron okay
and it generates a hole that can can
then
flow this way these two electrons
now can travel forward
gain a bunch of energy fall down
and gener each generate uh four more
electron
well each two more meaning now we have
two holes here
that will travel forward okay so you're
going from one
to two to four plus you go
one to two on holes now imagine this
keeps going
you go here to eight
and here to four okay so you have an
avalanche effect that uh
given enough energy these electrons can
excite other electrons from the valence
band into the conduction band
create more electrons and they can
create more holes that can also then
impact ionized so that's an exponential
growth and it's called impact ionization
or
and ultimately it leads to a breakdown
of a junction
okay now here's an animation of this
where the carriers basically start to
multiply
okay good
so can we calculate this now
here's an empirical answer to the
problem where we say well
the current at a space x plus delta x
is dependent on the original current
plus some current that is generated
within the distance delta x due to
impact
ionization there are some coefficients
alpha n
and alpha p that identify
or scale the probabilities of such
impact ionization to happen and
these terms can then grow exponentially
along the device okay
so you can build the differential of
this
and you end up with a differential
equation that looks like this all right
so so far nothing really fancy going on
one thing to that we're going to
simplify things with
at steady state the total current
is the sum of the
electron current and the the hole
current
that is being generated in this impact
ionization so we're going to write it
like this
where we can substitute the whole
current
by an expression of the electron current
okay
again nothing fancy here
and what we're going to do is now bring
the total current to the right
right hand side and are left with
a differential equation like this
okay
now we can
solve this differential equation and
this looks a little bit like
a y prime minus a y equals b
the general solution to that
integral looks like this the
non-definite integral like this
except now these alphas here
and i ns are a functions of x
so it gets a little bit more complicated
so the
the true solution to the differential
equation
includes these double complex integrals
and we'll try need to introduce a couple
of
approximations to this solution okay so
first of all
we'll assume that uh the the current
up here the initial little trigger
that of an electron flow into the system
is negligibly small certainly compared
to the final
current that is flowing after the
avalanche happens
okay so that's
assumption number one
and then we assume that um down here at
the
hole side at the end of the depletion
region there
that also the initial hole current
is zero so everything is really
generated inside
of the depletion region like this so
we had said that the total current is
the
electron current plus the whole current
if we evaluate the total current which
is continuous
in in the different slices just here at
this region w
we can say that the total current
is approximately to the electron current
that is being generated
through avalanching
total uh electron avalanche current
at the side w okay
and we introduce a factor it's called
the multiplication factor that's
how many more times total current do you
get out
compared to the electron current you
stuck in
here okay
so
so far we actually haven't done this
approximation here
okay all right so now i'm plugging in
these coefficients
into this horrendous looking exponential
integral
and it looks pretty horrendous still let
me see what other
approximations i can do so first of all
i'm just multiplying out
the denominator all across
and i can see that i cancel a couple of
terms
over here and i
am bringing um
so here is this one right this guy
turns to b1 that's the one here
that's the one here i'm bringing the one
over or bring the 1 minus 1 over m
over all right now i'm assuming that the
multiplication
is so tremendously large that i can
neglect this term
so i call this 1. so now we're stuck
with
still a pretty complicated integral
having the value of 1.
next we're going to assume that alpha n
equals alpha p
that the generation avalanche generation
probability of for the two carriers is
the same
can't be quite right because electrons
are lighter than the
holes they should um be
uh generating other electrons
easier but we'll assume it anyways
if that's the case then you lose this
horrendous exponential up there and we
don't need to integrate over the details
of this alpha n and alpha p as a
function of x
okay so
not the complex exponential here now the
next assumption is we actually assume
that these co this coefficient is
constant throughout
the junction and the key element to
understand is that most
avalanche happens roughly in the middle
of the junction because that's where the
electric
field is really the largest so
if we assume that then alpha n
times w turns one and there's a bunch of
experimental evidence and a bunch of
theory where faculty have spent
loads of their research time trying to
figure out
what these avalanche probability
coefficients are
so there's an abundance of research on
this
where you can look this up in
publications and textbooks
and you can then relate this avalanche
to a particular breakdown field
and given a certain if you reach this
breakdown field
you can then expect avalanche
to happen in reverse biased devices
all right so this amp impact ionization
can be a pretty bad thing or it can be
very good
now imagine in a good
circumstance where you have um
an electron maybe uh about
ready to be uh injected there maybe it's
a single
photon that you can absorb by
generating exactly one electron hole
pair
but you generate it right
teter tottering well if this electron
falls it will multiply into many
electrons and you can measure that
now that's a avalanche photodetector
so that's a very cool thing to to
utilize this avalanche effect now
there can be bad things if you're again
in a realistic device and you have
stray fields on corners where the
electric fields are much larger than you
expected them to be
and you can lead to breakdown so now
this can lead to
some engineering solutions that you may
be pursuing
where you want to reduce the electric
field
at a particular junction
and this can be done for example by
inserting
between the the p and the n region
inserting an intrinsic region an i
region
and what that does is it effectively
clips
the maximum amplitude of the electric
field and
spreads out the electric field in space
because
the total area under this curve
will be the same in this kind of design
but you've clipped the maximum
electric field and the area is the same
because the vbi
is the same that you built into the
device because that's again just
determined by the doping
of the p and the n region so by
inserting
a thin layer here that might be
intrinsically doped
you can cut down on on the
the peak electric fields and that was a
pretty important design feature for
mosfets
where they needed to reduce the fields
on the drain side
to increase the
reliability of these devices
all right finally there's an aspect of
something called
dead space in today's devices that are
extremely
small extremely short where this width
may be very small electrons may never
actually scatter inside the device they
might actually
reach
the other device and before they have a
chance
to um avalon
so you might have ballistic junctions
where the electrons shoot straight
through
without inducing impact ionization
and the lingo here is that that space
that will
allow the electron to really accelerate
is too small in order to for impact
ionization to happen
okay we're going to close down now with
a
discussion on how to distinguish zener
breakdown versus
impact ionization because they're
similar effects right you have the
avalanching here and you could have
zener tunneling and reverse bias how do
you distinguish between these two
well you can do so by a couple of
different measurements number one
for impact ionization to happen
you need to have a bias that is at least
larger than the band gap otherwise you
don't have carriers that can
[Music]
generate as much energy as to need to
cause avalanching
okay so for impact ionization
you need bias so if you have a breakdown
a zener breakdown
for a device that is close to one av
when your
band gap is roughly one av then you must
have zener breakdown rather than
avalanche breakdown
now so this so this means
the zener tunneling can happen for some
relatively small
reverse biases now there's another
aspect to the impact ionization that is
the noise behavior of the device
now if you generate all these carriers
by impact ionization
this is a very noisy behavior and you
can measure that
in your signal in your time variant
behavior of the electronics
so it's very noisy versus the zener
tunneling
is relatively smooth compared to that
all right so i think we're reaching the
end of this
this section um the junction
recombination is often used to
diagnose processes in devices
and uh diagnose the maturity of a
of a device these
defects and junctions can be misplaced
donor or acceptors
they may not be from deep traps it's
just
the thermodynamics of implants or
etc might have not had the donors settle
in into the appropriate crystal places
and create trap states instead
and impact ionization plays an important
role
in a vital variety of devices
like photodiodes for example or
needs to be avoided at corner effects on
three-dimensional geometries
all right i think this is it for section
20. so i thank you very much for your
attention
bye